More updates to documentation, include Global services (#13)
opencadc/opencadc.github.io: storage-inventory/ops/README.md

- ➡️ an artifact _URI_ is a unique idenitfier for a file (or object) stored in SI.  The last path component of a _URI_ is always the _filename_.

<a id='term-bucket'>**bucket**</a>  
SI can organize units of work (number of files or artifacts) by `buckets` and applications can be configured to work on subsets of these buckets.  
- Buckets are represented by hex strings, e.g. `a74`.
- When applications refer to buckets on storage, it refers to the location (e.g., an S3 bucket or a directory) in which files are stored.  This is dependent upon your storage configuration.
- When applications refer to buckets in the SI database, it refers to the _inventory.Artifact.uriBucket_ column in the database.  This column is populated with a random hex string on artifact creation.

> - ❗ _storage_ buckets and _uri_ buckets are not the same thing, e.g. files in _storage_ bucket `04c` are not necessarily the same as artifacts in _uri_ bucket `04c`.

Reviewer: You lost me here. Is the concept of S3 bucket necessary here? Can the second bullet be removed and the warning state instead that the underlying storage system might also use the notion of buckets but that is not necessarily the same?

Author: The term 'bucket' is used in SI to mean two different things: an abstraction of storage location and a artifact label. Both are hex numbers.  So, a file could have two different 'buckets' associated with it: a storage bucket (which might or might not be the same S3 or Swift bucket) and an artifact bucket, and those two aren't necessarily the same hex number -- in fact, it would be very unlikely for them to be the same.

The term bucket is used for S3 and Swift storage, independently of SI (e.g., from the man page of `s3cmd`: _s3cmd ls [s3://BUCKET[/PREFIX]] --  List objects or buckets_).  This might be a bit confusing when we're also talking about SI buckets.  I'll try to clear up the text a bit, but we do need to clarify the difference between storage buckets and artifact buckets (and, as you point out, S3/Swift buckets).

Reviewer: Can we just highlight that the SI buckets are simply units of work in SI and have nothing to do with the buckets that might be defined in the underlying storage system (S3 and swift)?

Author: I've changed the language to emphasize that the SI buckets are just labels.  The text describing the relationship between SI buckets and storage location was in answer to a question that came up in an SRC discussion, but so I've kept that but again pushed the label aspect.  The difference between an SI storage bucket and SI artifact bucket is also something that caused confusion elsewhere, so I've kept that text.

Reviewer 2: The `Artifact.uriBucket` is always a hex-string (currently hard coded to 5 chars so the set of artifacts can be subdivided into max 1e6 buckets, or fewer/larger buckets).

The `StorageLocation.storageBucket` is an implementation detail. See BucketType in cadc-storage-adapter interface. 

The OpaqueFileSystemStorageAdapter and the SwiftStorageAdapter they are HEX (length configurable) but that doesn't necessarily mean a specific number of storage objects of a certain type. The AdStorageAdapter has bucket type PLAIN. If we ever finish the "not opaque" FileSystemStorageAdapter, it will be PATH (or something like that).

Reviewer 2: Practically, `Artifact.uriBucket` is the thing being used when `critwall` and  `ratik` are configured to work on buckets. It is feasible to make `fenwick` and use this, but I don't think it is needed to scale incremental sync.

Only `tantar` uses about `StorageLocation.storageBucket`.

Although we used the configuration term _bucket_ for all of these uses, I'm not sure that was wrong... it is the same concept and in the context of the above applications it is about parallelizing work loads for scalability and nothing more.

It is only in the context of a StorageAdapter configuration that "buckets" may map to something in the back end storage and deployers need to be aware of the pros and cons.

Reviewer 2: aside: I would not mention S3 because we gave up on it due to insufficient API

Author: Fair enough: I only included it because the concept of S3 buckets is more widely known, but It could confuse someone.  Removed reference to S3.

Reviewer: The confusion comes from overloading the word _bucket_. The apps config files refer to `buckets` only so one have to figure out which ones is that. I didn't realize this from the beginning but I wish we used a different term for artifact URI grouping (`uriBin` or something similar) but it's probably too late to do that now. To disambiguate it, maybe it's not too late to update `critwall` and `ratik` config to refer to `uriBuckets` and `tantar` config to `storageBuckets` and avoid the use of simple `bucket` term.

@zombiepig01 - in this case just make clear that there are 2 types of independent buckets in the system: `uriBucket` (units of work) and `storageBuckets` (units of storage) and describe the role of each of them.

Author: I think we're getting into details that are best explained in the dev documents for the adapters or model.  Remember, this are operator/installer documents, not developer documents.

A bucket in the SI config is an abstraction, a label: 
- it is used as a unit of work (for applications working on storage and those working on uris).
- it is a label which in the storage model.  On some storage platforms, this label might be used in the storage organization, too (Swift, Opaque fs adapter).  
- a storage bucket is not the same as a uri bucket

That is basically what I say in the docs, plus a few other points of clarification that are to address questions that came up in other discussions.   There are a couple other storage adapters that are either not going to be used by anyone else (AD) or are not yet fully developed (structured FS adapter) so I'm not going to worry about those yet.

Author: FWIW, critwall and tantar refer to buckets: these are storage buckets as defined in the storage-adapter properties fileless ca.
- org.opencadc.critwall.buckets
- org.opencadc.tantar.buckets

ratik is the only other application that refers to buckets, and it is refering to uri buckets:
- org.opencadc.ratik.buckets

> <a id='term-collection'>**collection**</a>  

Reviewer: I think `collection` is something that we use at the CADC and it shouldn't be mentioned here. External users might be single collection and use a different file organization.

Author: I could be persuaded about this.  We do use the term collection generically when talking to other groups, and I don't think it is a CADC-specific term.  It is, though, at a layer above SI since it refers to curated collections within the archive.

Author: Removed the definition, and tried to clarify the language later in the text where I used this term.

A _collection_ is a set of artifacts/files/observations that form a logical group in your site's operations.  For example, for a multi-mission data centre like the CADC, collections are often the set of all data from a telescope.  A collection could also be all artifacts/files that compose a special data release for a single telescope (e.g. 'DR1').  
- The terms _collection_ and _namespace_ are occasionally used interchangeably, but _namespace_ has a key role in artifact metadata whereas _collection_ is just a term used to understand how artifacts are logically grouped.

<a id='term-namespace'>**namespace**</a>  

> A _namespace_ is an SI identifier for a _collection_ or part of a _collection_.  For example, `cadc:CFHT/` might be used to identify all CFHT files held at the CADC (the CFHT 'collection'); `cadc:CFHT/raw/` might be used to identify all of the raw CFHT files held at the CADC -- both `cadc:CFHT/` and `cadc:CFHT/raw/` are _namespaces_ but they identify different scopes of the CFHT _collection_.  SI services and applications often act on namespaces which are defined using regex patterns -- such as during file replication and determining access permissions -- so some thought must be put into what is used.  See the [SI data model page](https://github.com/opencadc/storage-inventory/tree/master/storage-inventory-dm) for more detail on the concepts of _URI_ and _namespace_.

Reviewer: I think this is more complicated that it needs to be. A namespace is part of an artifact URI that ends in `:` or `/` (the `cadc:TEST/data/raw/example/test1.fits` is great). Similarly to a FS, the tree-like organization of data offers a number of advantages:
- logical structure of data
- files with same name can exists at different location
- namespace-based access rules
- namespace-based operations (updates/deletes)
Unlike FS, performances of SI are not affected by the number of items in a namespace so structure can be flat.

Author: That section grew as I tried to answer questions or clarify misunderstandings that came up in conversations with others who were looking at SI.  A agree it is kinda verbose....

Author: Clarified somewhat

    - `cadc:TEST/data/`
    - `cadc:TEST/data/raw/`
    - `cadc:TEST/data/raw/example/`
- ❗ A _URI_ which has a _filepath_ of just the _filename_ (e.g. `cadc:test1.fits`) is not recommended.
- The part of the namespace preceding the `:` is referred to as the 'scheme' elsewhere in the documentation.  This could be thought of as defining a group of collections (e.g. `cadc:DAO`, `cadc:CFHT`, `cadc:JCMT`)
- The namespace hierarchy should be chosen to suit your project or telescope operations: a practical example of defining a namespace for a collection _might_ be:
    - `cadc:DAO/` - the namespace for all files from the DAO telescope which are unique to the CADC.
    - `cadc:DAO/camera1/raw/` - the namespace for all files from the DAO which are unprocessed raw observations using camera 1.
    - `cadc:DAO/camera1/raw/biases/` - the namespace for the subset of all camera 1 raw files which are bias frames.
    - `cadc:DAO/camera1/processed/` - the namespace for the subset of all processed frames from camera 1.
    - `cadc:DAO/pi2023011/` - the namespace for the PI project designated '2023011'.
    - alternatively, you could choose a simple flat namespace for all files, e.g. `cadc:DAO/`.

> <a id='term-resourceid'>**resourceID**</a>  

Reviewer: I would also try to simplify this. `resourceID` is a unique ID that allows services to change location without restarting other dependent services but it requires a `reg` service with a lookup. I think that the `ivo:` schema (and the fact that the services are already IVOA compatible) allows them to be registered with IVOA reg.

Author: I think most people looking at SI will not be familiar with IVOA registries (or IVOA, period).  The fact that these are IVOA compatible is a useful bit of info, but secondary to SI.  There was a lot of confusion about what these meant, and what had to go into them.

Reviewer: I think it's better now. I assume `reg` requires the `Ivo` scheme, no?

Author: I'm not sure, but I don't think it would be necessary.  `reg` itself is an ivoa compliant registry, but I don't think the services registered with it need to be.  That being said, I don't thing reg implements the entire registry spec....

- Front-end Web services:
    - A **File service** ([`minoc`](#configuration-minoc)): provides a REST based file service that supports HEAD, GET, PUT, POST, DELETE operations.
    - A **Query service** ([`luskan`](#configuration-luskan)): provides a Web Service for querying artifact metadata contained in the Inventory database, using the [`IVOA Table Access Protocol`](https://www.ivoa.net/documents/TAP/) (TODO: Replace TAP link with user document, not reference to spec....)
- Resources:
    - An **Inventory database**: this is the ledger tracking all the files storage at the site. Applications and services will access this database in parallel so it will need to have good performance, especially as the content at the site grows.  Currently only [Postgresql](https://www.postgres.org) is supported.
    - A **Storage platform**: the storage platform on which file will be stored. Currently, SI supports two types of storage: POSIX-compliant file-systems (e.g. Lustre) and Swift API compatible Object Store (e.g. Ceph Object Store)
        - SI services and applications interact with the back-end storage using a _Storage Adapter_:

>             - [POSIX filesystem adapter](#POSIX)

Reviewer: Just wondering why we call them adapters and not drivers like the rest of the world.

Author: I think that is a UML term here :D Pat would know.

This is also an annoyingly verbose section, but there was a lot of uncertainty about what these meant and how they were to be used.

    This service is required if Authentication and Authorization (A&A) is required for the SI deployment. Generally, **baldur** works along with a Group Membership Service (GMS) and/or User Service.
    - A **Group Membership Service** (`GMS`): .  Needed for providing the [IVAO group membership look-up API](https://github.com/ivoa-std/GMS) used by `baldur` and other services when determining access permissions.  For an example implementation, built on top of [Indigio IAM](https://indigo-iam.github.io/v/current/), see https://gitlab.com/ska-telescope/src/group-membership-service (more implementation details to follow).

### Global Site with Multiple Storage Sites

<center>
<img src="GlobalSiteWithExternal.drawio.png" width="500">
</center>

If you need to replicate files among multiple Storage Sites, you will need a Global Site.  The Global site maintains a view of all Storage sites, allowing individual Storage sites to discover files that they need to copy.  This also provides a single site which users can query to find files, rather than having to know about and search individual Storage sites.

> A Global site will be required different services than a Storage site, and both Storage sites and Global sites will need to run additional applications to synchronize metadata and files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Global site will require different services than a Storage site, and both Storage sites and Global sites will need to run additional applications to synchronize metadata and files.
```

    - both sites will also need to periodically run a **Metadata validation** application ([ratik](#configuration-ratik)) -- similar to `fenwick` a Storage site will only need to run one instance of `ratik` but a Global site will run an instance of `ratik` for each Storage site it is tracking.
    - a **File synchronization** application ([critwall](#configuration-critwall)) -- only Storage sites will need to run this application.  It will query the local inventory database for artifacts which do not have assocated files in local storage, query the Global `raven` service for the locations of those files, and download them to the local storage.  See the [File synchronization](#file-synchronization) description below.

#### Metadata synchronization

<center>
<img src="Metadata-sync.drawio.png" width="500">
</center>

#### File synchronization

<center>
<img src="File-sync.drawio.png" width="500">
</center>

> 1. User uses the `minoc` service (`site1.minoc`) to PUT a file to Site 1.

Reviewer: I would make an observation here that user can access `site1.minoc` directly if it has prior knowledge about the service or might end up there after being redirected by `global.raven`.

Author: Will do.

Author: Done

A representation of a file and its metadata in the SI database, specifically the _inventory.Artifact_ table (see the [SI data model](https://github.com/opencadc/storage-inventory/tree/master/storage-inventory-dm)).  The term _artifact_ is often used to refer to both the database representation of a file and the file itself as one thing, but when an SI application is acting on an _artifact_, it specifically refers to the database.
- ➡️ an artifact _URI_ is a unique idenitfier for a file (or object) stored in SI.  The last path component of a _URI_ is always the _filename_.

<a id='term-bucket'>**bucket**</a> 

> SI assigns a `bucket` to files on storage and to artifacts in the inventory database.  The bucket for an artifact and the bucket for the file described by that artifact are not necessarily the same. 

Reviewer: I'm afraid this is not clear either. Is the storage bucket exposed anywhere (config files) or just a configuration of the S3/Swift system?

        ```
    - test with, e.g., `curl https://www.example.org/reg/resource-caps`

1. <a id='configuration-baldur'>**baldur**</a> - Permission service

    - Required for: Storage site and Global site (Note: would likely be the same baldur instance for both)
    - Container image: Use the latest `storage-inventory/baldur` image from [`images.opencadc.org`](#resource-repository)
    - Uses an IVOA compatible GMS service and configured [namespaces](#term-namespace) to determine file access permissions.
    - Configuration notes:
        - `baldur.properties`:
            - The `org.opencadc.baldur.allowedUser` x509 DN specified here is generally a 'service' user -- the services that call `baldur` need to be configured with this user's certificate.
                - in `minoc` and `raven` coniguration, this is the `cadcproxy.pem` file for these services.
            - The `org.opencadc.baldur.allowedGroup` is an IVOA GMS group [resourceID](#term-resourceid).  
                - The GMS service must be registered in the available Registry service.
                - the configured `readOnlyGroup` and `readWriteGroup` entries are also IVOA GMS group [resourceIDs](#term-resourceid).

>     - See the [opencadc storage inventory baldur](https://github.com/opencadc/storage-inventory/tree/master/baldur) documentation for more configuration details.

Reviewer: Shouldn't this be the first bullet, i.e. the up-to-date, complete configuration is at this location and following is just some practical consideration. This is about maintenance and stating up front where the ultimate source resides.

Author: I was kinda thinking that, too.

Author: Moved these urls near to the top of the service sections

1. <a id='configuration-luskan'>**luskan**</a> - Query service

    - Required for: Storage site and Global site
    - Container image: Use the latest `storage-inventory/luskan` image from [`images.opencadc.org`](#resource-repository)
    - Configuration notes:
        - `luskan.properties`:
            - `org.opencadc.luskan.isStorageSite` - for a storage site, this should be set to `true`.  The content of the inventory database is different between a storage site and a global site.
            - `org.opencadc.luskan.allowedGroup` is an IVOA GMS group [resourceID](#term-resourceid).
                - the GMS service must be configured in the available Registry service.
        - `catalina.properties`:
            - the `org.opencadc.luskan.uws.username` database account is generally the same as the 'TAP admin user' configured when creating the [database](#configuration-database).
            - the `org.opencadc.luskan.tapadm.username` database account is the same 'TAP admin user'.
            - the `org.opencadc.luskan.query.username` database account is the 'TAP query user' account.
        - `cadc-tap-tmp.properties`:

>             - `org.opencadc.tap.tmp.TempStorageManager.baseURL` is the URL for _this_ `luskan` service, plus the `/results` path.

Reviewer: I don't understand the part about `/results` path.

Author: I'll try to clarify this.  Unfortunately, it does only make sense if you're also looking at the cadc-tap-tmp documentation.  Maybe this should be clarified there, instead.

Author: Clarified

                - the `{server name}` in the `baseURL` is the public name of the proxy fronting your `luskan` service (e.g. `www.example.org`).
                - the `{luskan path}` is the path to your `luskan service` (likely just 'luskan', e.g. `www.example.org/luskan`).
            - the above `/results` path will be mapped to the path _in the container_ specified by `org.opencadc.tap.tmp.TempStorageManager.baseStorageDir`.  Ideally, this path will be a file-system that is shared among all `luskan` instances for your site.
    - See the [opencadc storage inventory luskan](https://github.com/opencadc/storage-inventory/tree/master/luskan) documentation for more configuration details.
    - test with, e.g., `curl https://www.example.org/luskan/availability`

1. <a id='configuration-raven'>**raven**</a> - File location service

    - Required for: Global site only
    - Container image: Use the latest `storage-inventory/raven` image from [`images.opencadc.org`](#resource-repository)
    - Configuration notes:
        - `raven.properties`
            - (optional) `org.opencadc.raven.publicKeyFile` and `org.opencadc.raven.privateKeyFile`:

>                 - These are optional but needed so that raven can generate 'pre-authorized' URLs for files, reducing the number of authentication queries required for a user to download a file.  The authentication information is embedded in a specially encoded URL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                - These are optional optimizations needed so that raven can generate 'pre-authorized' URLs for files, allowing the minocs that serve the file to skip this step before delivering the file.  The authentication information is embedded in a specially encoded URL.
```

                - these are RSA public and private key files which can be generated using [cadc-keygen](https://github.com/opencadc/core/tree/master/cadc-keygen) or the commands below:

                        ssh-keygen -b 2048 -t rsa -m pkcs8 -f temp_rsa
                        ssh-keygen -e -m pkcs8 -f temp_rsa.pub > raven-public.key
                        mv temp_rsa raven-private.key
                        rm temp_rsa.pub

>                 - the `publicKeyFile` will be required by services which need to verify the pre-authorized URLS (`minoc`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                - the `publicKeyFile` will be required by services which need to verify the pre-authorized URLs (`minoc`).
```
